docs: vite 8 post (#21792)
vitejs/vite: docs/blog/announcing-vite8.md

We invite you to help us improve Vite (joining the more than [1.2K contributors to Vite Core](https://github.com/vitejs/vite/graphs/contributors)), our dependencies, or plugins and projects in the ecosystem. Learn more at our [Contributing Guide](https://github.com/vitejs/vite/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md). A good way to get started is by [triaging issues](https://github.com/vitejs/vite/issues), [reviewing PRs](https://github.com/vitejs/vite/pulls), sending tests PRs based on open issues, and supporting others in [Discussions](https://github.com/vitejs/vite/discussions) or Vite Land's [help forum](https://discord.com/channels/804011606160703521/1019670660856942652). If you have questions, join our [Discord community](https://chat.vite.dev) and talk to us in the [#contributing channel](https://discord.com/channels/804011606160703521/804439875226173480).

Stay updated and connect with others building on top of Vite by following us on [Bluesky](https://bsky.app/profile/vite.dev), [X](https://twitter.com/vite_js), or [Mastodon](https://webtoo.ls/@vite).

## The Rolldown-Powered Vite

### The problem

> Since its earliest versions, Vite relied on two separate bundlers to serve different needs. [esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/) handled fast compilation during development -- dependency pre-bundling and TypeScript/JSX transforms that made the dev experience feel instant. [Rollup](https://rollupjs.org/) handled production bundling, chunking, and optimization, with its rich plugin API powering the entire Vite plugin ecosystem.

Reviewer: Can we replace some (or maybe all) of the `--` with commas or periods? At the risk of being called out that this is entirely LLM-written, unfortunately.

esbuild powered Vite's remarkably fast development experience from its early days -- dependency pre-bundling, TypeScript and JSX transforms that completed in milliseconds rather than hundreds. esbuild proved that build tools could be orders of magnitude faster, and its speed set the bar that inspired an entire generation of Rust and Go-based tooling. Thank you, [Evan Wallace](https://github.com/evanw), for showing all of us what was possible.

Without these two projects, Vite would not exist as it does today. Even as we move forward with Rolldown, the influence of Rollup and esbuild is deeply embedded in Vite's DNA, and we are grateful for everything they have given to the ecosystem. You can learn more about all the projects and people Vite depends on at our [Acknowledgements](/acknowledgements) page.

## Acknowledgments

> Vite 8 was crafted by the [Vite Team](/team) with the help of the wide community of contributors, downstream maintainers, and plugin authors. We are especially grateful to everyone who participated in the `rolldown-vite` preview and the Vite 8 beta period -- your testing, bug reports, and feedback made the Rolldown migration possible and shaped this release into something we are proud of.

Reviewer: Sapphi, give yourself some credit too 😄 You carried this release.

```suggestion
Vite 8 was led by [Sapphi](https://github.com/sapphi-red) and the [Vite Team](/team) with the help of the wide community of contributors, downstream maintainers, and plugin authors. We are especially grateful to everyone who participated in the `rolldown-vite` preview and the Vite 8 beta period -- your testing, bug reports, and feedback made the Rolldown migration possible and shaped this release into something we are proud of.
```
